Feature Engineering and EDA/Readme.md, before:

Note: In order to efficiently manage different phases of the project, I modularized my code and created separate ipynb's based on the function that I am executing. For Feature Engineering and EDA, there are 4 relevant notebooks, which are described below.

How to run the notebooks and what they do:
- [1] Capstone_HL_TargetY_v2.ipynb: generates the synthetic "Access Disruption Risk Index" (ADRI), which will serve as the target variable (y) in future analysis; exports "master_df_v2.xlsx".
- [2] Capstone_HL_featureengineering.ipynb: notebook which generates features (X) using the CMS Open Enrollment Period Public Use Files (OEP PUF) and appends; also generates a profile report for features that will be deployed for modeling later in the project; requires "master_df_v2.xlsx" as input file; exports "master_df_with_features.xlsx". 
- [3] Capstone_HL_corranalysis.ipynb: a separate notebook which loads the output from [2] and runs a Pearson's Correlation Analysis; requires "master_df_with_features.xlsx" as input file.
- [X] Baseline_Model.ipynb: runs a Logistic Regression model using the output from [2] to provide a baseline model for comparison later on; requires "master_df_with_features.xlsx" as input file.

Notebooks [1] and [2] should be run first and in order, prior to running [3] and [X].
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________


Visualizations generated from [3]:
- CorrelationHeatmap_TopADRIDrivers.png 
- Top3StatisticalDrivers.png

Visualizations generated using custom statistical/geo-mapping tools:
- Distribution of Risk Scores (RMS ADRI, log-trans risk cliff).png -- plot of ADRI distribution, including the "subsidy cliff" and "low income" risk scores that were used to generate ADRI.
- Histogram of Risk Scores (RMS ADRI, log-trans risk cliff).png -- histogram distributions where subsidy cliff risk, low income risk, and ADRI are bucketed into 4 categories (low/stable, moderate/"monitor", high/watchlist, and critical/priority)
- Norm_Log Cliff Risk Score.png -- plot of subsidy risk score (normalized, log-based) at the US county-level; states that were excluded are shaded in gray (these reflect state-managed ACA markets, not federally managed).
- Norm_LowIncome_Risk score.png -- plot of low income risk score (normalized) at the US county-level; states that were excluded are shaded in gray (these reflect state-managed ACA markets, not federally managed).

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________


Results from Baseline Model:
I selected Logistic Regression as the baseline model to establish a performance benchmark using linear relationships and the initial CMS dataset. This provides a comparative reference point for the future XGBoost model (note: I will also be running a K-Means Clustering), which will incorporate non-linear clustering interactions and external SVI data to improve predictive accuracy.

--- Baseline Results ---
              precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.85      0.92      0.89       404
           1       0.69      0.52      0.59       135

    accuracy                           0.82       539
   macro avg       0.77      0.72      0.74       539
weighted avg       0.81      0.82      0.81       539

Baseline ROC-AUC: 0.8656

--- Feature Coefficients (Top Drivers) ---
feat_subsidy_coverage_ratio   -7.393034
feat_pct_aian                 -0.500975
feat_pct_black                -0.095079
feat_net_attrition            -0.013285
feat_pct_hispanic             -0.009649
feat_passive_renewal          -0.007159
avg_premium_before_APTC        0.011143
feat_pct_gold                  0.021579
feat_pct_FPL_250_400           0.023823
feat_pct_bronze                0.030790
feat_pct_asian                 0.031432
feat_market_newness            0.067956
feat_pct_age_55_over           0.087767
feat_pct_FPL_150_250           0.159933
feat_pct_FPL_100_150           0.281675
feat_pct_FPL_400_plus          0.356508

The baseline Logistic Regression model achieved a strong ROC-AUC of 0.86, confirming that the engineered CMS features (specifically income distribution and premium levels) are highly predictive of market risk. However, the model suffers from low sensitivity (Recall: 0.52), failing to identify nearly half of the high-risk counties. This suggests that the relationship between market features and risk is likely non-linear, justifying the future use of K-Means clustering and XGBoost to capture complex market behaviors and improve detection rates.

Commit message:

Update README with data file info and model results
Added information about input data files and visualizations generated from the analysis. Updated baseline model results and explained the limitations of the Logistic Regression model.

Feature Engineering and EDA/Readme.md, after:

Note: In order to efficiently manage different phases of the project, I modularized my code and created separate ipynb's based on the function that I am executing. For Feature Engineering and EDA, there are 4 relevant notebooks, which are described below.

Input data files can be found in the "data" subfolder. Intermediate files, generated in code below, have also been uploaded.

How to run the notebooks and what they do:
- [1] Capstone_HL_TargetY_v2.ipynb: generates the synthetic "Access Disruption Risk Index" (ADRI), which will serve as the target variable (y) in future analysis; exports "master_df_v2.xlsx".
- [2] Capstone_HL_featureengineering.ipynb: notebook which generates features (X) using the CMS Open Enrollment Period Public Use Files (OEP PUF) and appends; also generates a profile report for features that will be deployed for modeling later in the project; requires "master_df_v2.xlsx" as input file; exports "master_df_with_features.xlsx". 
- [3] Capstone_HL_corranalysis.ipynb: a separate notebook which loads the output from [2] and runs a Pearson's Correlation Analysis; requires "master_df_with_features.xlsx" as input file.
- [X] Baseline_Model.ipynb: runs a Logistic Regression model using the output from [2] to provide a baseline model for comparison later on; requires "master_df_with_features.xlsx" as input file.

Notebooks [1] and [2] should be run first and in order, prior to running [3] and [X].
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________


Visualizations generated from [3] -- see "visualization" subfolder:
- CorrelationHeatmap_TopADRIDrivers.png 
- Top3StatisticalDrivers.png

Visualizations generated using custom statistical/geo-mapping tools:
- Distribution of Risk Scores (RMS ADRI, log-trans risk cliff).png -- plot of ADRI distribution, including the "subsidy cliff" and "low income" risk scores that were used to generate ADRI.
- Histogram of Risk Scores (RMS ADRI, log-trans risk cliff).png -- histogram distributions where subsidy cliff risk, low income risk, and ADRI are bucketed into 4 categories (low/stable, moderate/"monitor", high/watchlist, and critical/priority)
- Norm_Log Cliff Risk Score.png -- plot of subsidy risk score (normalized, log-based) at the US county-level; states that were excluded are shaded in gray (these reflect state-managed ACA markets, not federally managed).
- Norm_LowIncome_Risk score.png -- plot of low income risk score (normalized) at the US county-level; states that were excluded are shaded in gray (these reflect state-managed ACA markets, not federally managed).

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________


Results from Baseline Model:
I selected Logistic Regression as the baseline model to establish a performance benchmark using linear relationships and the initial CMS dataset. This provides a comparative reference point for the future XGBoost model (note: I will also be running a K-Means Clustering), which will incorporate non-linear clustering interactions and external SVI data to improve predictive accuracy.

--- Baseline Results ---

              precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.85      0.92      0.89       404
           1       0.69      0.52      0.59       135
    accuracy                           0.82       539


Baseline ROC-AUC: 0.8656

The baseline Logistic Regression model achieved a strong ROC-AUC of 0.86, confirming that the engineered CMS features (specifically income distribution and premium levels) are highly predictive of market risk. However, the model suffers from low sensitivity (Recall: 0.52), failing to identify nearly half of the high-risk counties. This suggests that the relationship between market features and risk is likely non-linear, justifying the future use of K-Means clustering and XGBoost to capture complex market behaviors and improve detection rates.
